# Comparison between different data streaming technologies

In this comparison, **Apache Kafka, Apache PulsaR and RabbitMQ, Delta Lake and Protobuf** data streaming technologies
will be considered.

We will consider the following aspects:
- Read and write performance.
- Data storage and distribution capacity.
- Maturity of the technology
- Ecosystem of components with which it integrates
- Particular characteristics of each technology that differentiate it from the rest.
- Other relevant aspects.

## Apache Kafka
Let's start by talking about Apache Kafka, one of the Apache Foundation's most active projects. Clients produce/consume
messages directly to/from a cluster of brokers. It uses topics to classify messages, and as a remarkable feature we
could highlight its high scalability (dividing topics into partitions). It is highly failure tolerant because it uses the
Raft protocol and integrates well with other tools such as Kubernetes. Companies such as Netflix or Airbnb use Kafka to
offer their customers experiences based on real-time data.


## Apache Pulsar
In the case of Apache Pulsar, this is a Pub/Sub (Publish/Subscribe) messaging system also developed and maintained by the
Apache Foundation. It can support up to one million topics in a single cluster, so it stands out for its high scalability
and also provides geo-replication capability as a mechanism to offer disaster-recovery. This in Kafka is achieved with
additional external functionality, Pulsar has it built in and it is faster because it does not use leaders and followers,
its replication algorithm is based on quorum (from the node set agreement). It is also multi-tenancy (a cluster can process
several tenants or independent logical units). In Pulsar, storage is separated from processing, and this storage is done
through the Apache BookKeeper tool.

## RabbitMQ
And finally RabbitMQ, which is a messaging middleware, serves as an intermediary between servers and producers. From what
I have read, the type of scenarios in which it is really useful are very well defined, being mediocre in different types.
This scenario I'm talking about is applications that require complex routing and read confirmation. An example might be
GitHub. In short, you define queues that are going to stack the messages sent by the producers until the consuming
applications get the message and process it. It supports a large number of programming languages, including Scala, and has
different routing patterns, such as direct routing or topic routing, which allow applications to define how messages are
distributed in queues. It also has many plugins that add new functionality, such as user and permission management, which
is useful for security.

## Comparison
Starting with the comparison we can start with the read/write performance, and both Kafka and Pulsar have very good
performance in these aspects, being less suitable RabbitMQ if this feature is critical for your application. To say one
that stands out in this aspect, we would say that this would be Kafka.

On the other hand, in terms of storage, Kafka provides robust and efficient storage capacity thanks to segmented storage,
excellent replication and high scalability. Pulsar, on the other hand, separates the storage leaving it to BookKeeper
as I mentioned just above, in this tool the data is written in ledgers (books) that are distributed in bookies (storage
servers). And the data is stored in segments, which allows for efficient management and failover. By separating computation
and storage, it facilitates scalability. However, Rabbit has more limited capabilities in these respects.

In terms of maturity, if we talk about age, RabbitMQ is the oldest, being created in 2007, followed by Kafka, in 2011,
and Pulsar is the most modern, created in 2016. In terms of reputation and popularity, Kafka is known for its robustness
and stability in production environments, Pulsar, although newer, is also growing very fast and is gaining a following
due to its flexible architecture and other features such as multi-tenancy. On the other hand, RabbitMQ is well known
and used in many industries that need flexible routing and message acknowledgement.

On the ecosystem side, RabbitMQ has a large ecosystem, with a variety of plugins, extensions and support for multiple
protocols. Likewise, Kafka also has a broad ecosystem of tools including Kafka Connect, Kafka Streams... And it is Pulsar
that is still growing, but it already has support for Pulsar Functions, Pulsar SQL,...

Focusing on the community and documentation of each of the tools, Kafka has extensive documentation and many learning
resources with examples, and a very loyal community. It also has commercial support through Confluent and other vendors.
Similar is the case for Pulsar, which is less old. It is also commercially supported by StreamNative, and RabbitMQ has
extensive documentation with many learning and improvement resources.

In conclusion, Apache Kafka is the preferred option for real-time processing of large volumes of data, Apache Pulsar is
coming on strong, being a more modern and suitable option in environments where greater flexibility is required, and
finally RabbitMQ continues to be the star in the cases we have mentioned.

Other processing technologies could be:

- Apache Storm: with low latency and great flexibility, supporting multiple programming languages, however it can be
complicated to maintain and scale.
- Apache Flink: which allows stateful data processing, making complex real-time analysis possible.
- Apache Samza: it also supports stateful data processing but is less mature than Flink.
- And finally, some cloud solutions such as Amazon Kinesis, Google Cloud Pub/Sub and Azure Events Hub, ideal for
those who are immersed in Cloud ecosystems.

### Bibliography:

Official documentation:
- Apache Kafka: https://kafka.apache.org/
- Apache Pulsar: https://pulsar.apache.org/
- RabbitMQ: https://www.rabbitmq.com/

Other:
- https://aprenderbigdata.com/apache-pulsar/
- https://www.confluent.io/blog/kafka-fastest-messaging-system/
- https://www.muycomputerpro.com/2023/02/15/data-streaming-data
- https://aprenderbigdata.com/stream-processing/
- https://martin.kleppmann.com/papers/kafka-debull15.pdf
- https://www.enmilocalfunciona.io/presentando-apache-pulsar/
- https://www.pragma.com.co/academia/lecciones/conozcamos-sobre-rabbitmq-sus-componentes-y-beneficios




